\section{Introduction}\label{sec:intro}



%\input{sections/ccf22-problem-description}
\input{ccf23-problem-description}
\input{ccf23-research-objectives}


%\subsection{Significance of This Proposed Project: NSF Merit Criteria}

\section{Intellectual Merits}

The results of this project will advance the state-of-the-art
knowledge and scientific foundations in AI/ML for Software
Engineering. They are transformative and directly help improve
software engineering tools empowered by AI/ML.

\noindent \underline{{\bf Advance the state-of-the-art knowledge and
    understanding}}. Voice-driven programming framework will advance
the body of knowledge and theoretical foundations for machine learning
and AI for code. The empirical study in Thrust 1 will help advance the
state-of-the-knowledge in how assistive technology for VIPLs should
be.

\noindent \underline{{\bf Scientific foundation, creative/original
    research}}. This project will provide a scientific foundation
(novel concepts, representations, algorithms, models, and tools) (1)
to enable voice-driven assistive technology, (2) to advance the AI/ML
models in both voice recognition and code generation, and (3) to
enable the applications of AI/ML for code research in building
interactive IDEs for VIPLs.

\section{Broader Impacts}

\underline{{\bf (1) Transformative and benefits to society}}. our
programming environment empowers visually-impaired programmers with a
versatile and inclusive toolset, fostering a dynamic programming
journey while mitigating accessibility barriers. We aspire to break
down barriers and make the world of programming accessible to all,
regardless of visual impairments, contributing to a more diverse and
vibrant programming community.


\noindent\underline{{\bf (2) Foster other related research
    activities}}. Our results will foster {\em research activities in
  related fields of {\bf machine learning} and {\bf software
    engineering}}. We will produce theoretical concepts and techniques
that are novel in deep learning, e.g., novel neural networks to model
and learn for code.

%The applications of our neural program analysis in software
%engineering applications will advance software security and
%reliability.

\noindent\underline{{\bf (3) Education, dissemination, and broader
    participation}} (Section~\ref{edu}). The research will enhance the
infrastructure for teaching/research via tools and data sets for use
by students and practitioners, and for enhancement by researchers. We
will provide related learning modules for educators as well. It will
include outreach activities for undergraduate students,
underrepresented groups, minorities, and women in science.
